feat: add docs for News launches (#48025)
freeCodeCamp/freeCodeCamp: docs/how-to-enable-new-languages.md

News sources trending links and article titles from the [CDN repo](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/cdn) during the build and adds them to the footer.

Clone the CDN repo and create a new branch.

In the [`build/universal/trending`](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/cdn/tree/main/build/universal/trending) directory, create a new file and name it `language.yaml`. For example, if you are launching Dothraki News, name the file `dothraki.yaml`.

Then copy the contents of the [`english.yaml`](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/cdn/blob/main/build/universal/trending/english.yaml) trending file and paste it into the new YAML file you just created.

The contents will look something like this:

```yaml
article0title: 'Learn JavaScript'
article0link: 'https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/learn-javascript-free-js-courses-for-beginners/'
article1title: 'Linux ln Example'
article1link: 'https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/linux-ln-how-to-create-a-symbolic-link-in-linux-example-bash-command'
article2title: 'JS document.ready()'
article2link: 'https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/javascript-document-ready-jquery-example/'
article3title: ...
article3link: ...
  ...
```

> Open a PR to the CDN repo with these changes and tag `@freeCodeCamp/dev-team` for review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open a PR to the CDN repo with these changes for review.
```

We don't need to tag - the CODEOWNERS auto-requests reviews in a round robin style.

> ## Prep the News Repo for the New Language

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prep the News Repo for the New Language

> [!WARN]
> Pull requests to the news repo *must* come from the same repo. You should not work off of a fork for this step.
```

As an excuse to break up the two headers next to each other, but also this is important to note.

Author: Awesome, this looks great. And it's a much better idea to add this warning up front like you did here.

- `locales`: This array contains the active and upcoming News languages. These are the values that are used in the `.env` file to choose the Ghost instance and UI to use for each build. Add the text name of the new language in lowercase to this array.
- `localeCodes`: This object is a map of ISO codes for each language, and is used to configure i18next before building the UI. To add a new language, use the lowercase language name as the _key_ and the ISO 639-1 language code as the _value_.
- `algoliaIndices`: This object is a map of Algolia indicies for each language. To add a new language, use the lowercase language name as the _key_, and `news-` followed by the lowercase ISO 639-1 language code as the _value_.

> [!NOTE]
> If you are unsure about the string to use while setting `algoliaIndicies, send a message to Kris (@scissorsneedfoodtoo), or someone else with access to Algolia, and ask them to check.

For example, if you are launching Dothraki News, here are what the objects / arrays above should look like:

```js
const locales = ['arabic', 'bengali', 'chinese', 'english', 'dothraki'];

> const localeCodes = {
>   arabic: 'ar',
>   bengali: 'bn',
>   chinese: 'zh',
>   english: 'en',
>   dothraki: 'do'
> };
> 
> const algoliaIndices = {
>   arabic: 'news-ar',
>   bengali: 'news-bn',
>   chinese: 'news-zh',
>   english: 'news',
>   dothraki: 'news-do'
> };
> ```
> 
> > [!NOTE]
> > Note that the values above are in alphabetic order. Also, Dothraki does not actually have an ISO 639-1 code, so `do` is just used as an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const localeCodes = {
  arabic: 'ar',
  bengali: 'bn',
  chinese: 'zh',
  english: 'en',
  dothraki: 'mis'
};

const algoliaIndices = {
  arabic: 'news-ar',
  bengali: 'news-bn',
  chinese: 'news-zh',
  english: 'news',
  dothraki: 'news-mis'
};
```

> [!NOTE]
> Note that the values above are in alphabetic order. Also, Dothraki does not actually have an ISO 639-1 code, so `mis` is just used as the uncoded language value.
```

Nitpicking, but ISO 369-2 has an actual code for non-coded languages.

Author: Nice, I didn't realize that. TIL!

### Add the i18next JSON Files for the New Language

Next, go to the `config/i18n/locales` directory, create a new folder, and give it the name of the new language you're adding. For example, if you're launching Dothraki News, create a new folder named `dothraki`.

> Then go to the `english` directory, copy the `links.json` and `meta-tags.json` files, and paste them into your new folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then go to the `english` directory, copy the JSON files, and paste them into your new folder.
```

As mentioned on the Indonesian news PR.

Author: Sure, this looks good, and should be easier to follow.

I'll just make sure to update the following section and say that the contents of the English `serve.json` file should be replaced by the object with the empty `redirects` array below.

In your new folder, create a file called `serve.json` and add the following:

```json
{
  "redirects": []
}
```

> 
> > [!NOTE]
> > You do not need to create a `translation.json` file. This file will be downloaded from Crowdin before the new language launches.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

### Add a YAML File for Trending Articles

Clone the [CDN repo](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/cdn) and create a new branch.

In the [`build/universal/trending`](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/cdn/tree/main/build/universal/trending) directory, create a new file and name it `language.yaml`. For example, if you are launching Dothraki News, name the file `dothraki.yaml`.

Then copy the contents of the [`english.yaml`](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/cdn/blob/main/build/universal/trending/english.yaml) trending file and paste it into the new YAML file you just created.

The contents will look something like this:

```yaml
article0title: 'Learn JavaScript'
article0link: 'https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/learn-javascript-free-js-courses-for-beginners/'
article1title: 'Linux ln Example'
article1link: 'https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/linux-ln-how-to-create-a-symbolic-link-in-linux-example-bash-command'
article2title: 'JS document.ready()'
article2link: 'https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/javascript-document-ready-jquery-example/'
article3title: ...
article3link: ...
  ...
```

### Add a dayjs file for the New Language

> In the [`build/news-assets/dayjs/1.10.4/locale`](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/cdn/tree/main/build/news-assets/dayjs/1.10.4/locale) directory, create a new file and name it `isocode.min.js`. For example, if you are launching Dothraki News, name the file `mis.min.js`.

Reviewer 2: I don't see this path `build/news-assets/dayjs/1.10.4/locale`. What I see is `build/news-assets/dayjs/days-1.9.1/locale`. Which path is the correct one? @scissorsneedfoodtoo

Reviewer 3: <img width="1384" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1884376/195920738-8902fda8-ab2d-4637-b48c-84dcb9bf4638.png">

Reviewer 3: In any case, we should clear up version no. will change??

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [`build/news-assets/dayjs/<version>/locale`](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/cdn/tree/main/build/news-assets/dayjs/1.10.4/locale) directory, create a new file and name it `isocode.min.js`. For example, if you are launching Dothraki News, name the file `mis.min.js`.

> [!NOTE]
> The version number will change as the dependencies are updated.
```

Reviewer 2: > In any case, we should clear up version no. will change??

Sorry, I deleted the comment before refreshing the page because with fresh eyes, I spotted the folder `1.10.4` . Also, I didn't see your comments. 

It's much clearer with the `<version>` placeholder 👍

Author: Sure, I'll see what I can do about removing the version number from other parts of the doc in case we change this in the future.

Then, visit [this page on cdnjs](https://cdnjs.com/libraries/dayjs/1.10.4) with all available dayjs v1.10.4 files, find the `https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/dayjs/1.10.4/locale/isocode.min.js` link for the new language, and open it in a new tab.

> Copy the dayjs code from the new tab into the new file you created. The code will be similar to this, but minified:

Reviewer 2: I am sure we are talking about the `dayjs.min.js` file here. I believe it would be better to add the complete file name instead of `daysjs`. WYA'T?

Author: Hey @RafaelDavisH, sorry again if this was unclear.

I left a comment and a link to the file we need to add in your PR to the CDN repo: https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/cdn/pull/163#issuecomment-1280433546

Also, I tried to rewrite the Day.js bits so it's more clear that the only thing we need to add is a Day.js locale file for the new language.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good @scissorsneedfoodtoo. I made the change to days.min.js file and push it to the PR #163

        '_'
      )
  };
});
```

Then open a PR to the CDN repo to add both the YAML and dayjs files for review.

## Prep the News Repo for the New Language

The [News repo](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/news) pulls data from a Ghost instance, the files you added to the CDN, builds News, and deploys it.

> [!WARN]
> Pull requests to the news repo _must_ come from the same repo. You should not work off of a fork for this step.

### Modify the Main Config File

Clone the News repo and create a new branch.

Open the `config/index.js` file to add the new language and configure the necessary values. There are a few objects and arrays to modify:

- `locales`: This array contains the active and upcoming News languages. These are the values that are used in the `.env` file to choose the Ghost instance and UI to use for each build. Add the text name of the new language in lowercase to this array.
- `localeCodes`: This object is a map of ISO codes for each language, and is used to configure i18next before building the UI. To add a new language, use the lowercase language name as the _key_ and the ISO 639-1 language code as the _value_.

> - `algoliaIndices`: This object is a map of Algolia indicies for each language. To add a new language, use the lowercase language name as the _key_, and `news-` followed by the lowercase ISO 639-1 language code as the _value_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `algoliaIndices`: This object is a map of Algolia indices for each language. To add a new language, use the lowercase language name as the _key_, and `news-` followed by the lowercase ISO 639-1 language code as the _value_.
```

Author: Thanks for catching that @Sembauke 👍 I must have added the incorrect spelling of indices to my system's dictionary at some point.

- `algoliaIndices`: This object is a map of Algolia indices for each language. To add a new language, use the lowercase language name as the _key_, and `news-` followed by the lowercase ISO 639-1 language code as the _value_.

> [!NOTE]
> If you are unsure about the string to use while setting `algoliaIndices`, send a message to Kris (@scissorsneedfoodtoo), or someone else with access to Algolia, and ask them to check.

For example, if you are launching Dothraki News, here are what the objects / arrays above should look like:

```js
const locales = ['arabic', 'bengali', 'chinese', 'english', 'dothraki'];

const localeCodes = {
  arabic: 'ar',
  bengali: 'bn',
  chinese: 'zh',
  english: 'en',
  dothraki: 'mis'
};

const algoliaIndices = {
  arabic: 'news-ar',
  bengali: 'news-bn',
  chinese: 'news-zh',
  english: 'news',
  dothraki: 'news-mis'
};
```

### Add the i18next JSON Files for the New Language

Next, go to the `config/i18n/locales` directory, create a new folder, and give it the name of the new language you're adding. For example, if you're launching Dothraki News, create a new folder named `dothraki`.

> Then go to the `english` directory, copy the JSON files, and paste them into your new folder.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Then copy the JSON files from the `english` directory to your new folder.
```
Saves a few characters.

Author: Awesome. This looks good, too.

In your new folder, open the `serve.json` file and replace its contents with the following:

```json
{
  "redirects": []
}
```

Then commit and push your branch directly to the News repo.

> [!NOTE]
> You need to be on one of the teams with access to the News repo to push branches directly to News. Currently, only the dev, i18n, and staff teams are allowed to do this.

Finally, open a PR for review.

> Once both your PRs to the CDN and News repo are merged, staff will create a couple more PRs to enable the new language and launch the site.

Reviewer 5: Is the intention to merge these PRs whenever they've been through review or wait until you're ready to deploy?
```suggestion
Once both your PRs to the CDN and News repo have been approved, they can be merged. Deployment will be handled subsequently by the staff.
```
Given that deployment is out of scope, I don't think we need to give details.

Author: Sure, this suggestion looks good. The main thing I want to get across is that there are a few more steps before News can be launched for the new language, and it's still clear with this wording.

- `localeCodes`: This object is a map of ISO codes for each language, and is used to configure i18next before building the UI. To add a new language, use the lowercase language name as the _key_ and the ISO 639-1 language code as the _value_.
- `algoliaIndices`: This object is a map of Algolia indicies for each language. To add a new language, use the lowercase language name as the _key_, and `news-` followed by the lowercase ISO 639-1 language code as the _value_.

> [!NOTE]
> If you are unsure about the string to use while setting `algoliaIndicies, send a message to Kris (@scissorsneedfoodtoo), or someone else with access to Algolia, and ask them to check.

For example, if you are launching Dothraki News, here are what the objects / arrays above should look like:

```js
const locales = ['arabic', 'bengali', 'chinese', 'english', 'dothraki'];

const localeCodes = {
  arabic: 'ar',
  bengali: 'bn',
  chinese: 'zh',
  english: 'en',
  dothraki: 'mis'
};

const algoliaIndices = {
  arabic: 'news-ar',
  bengali: 'news-bn',
  chinese: 'news-zh',
  english: 'news',
  dothraki: 'news-mis'

> };

Reviewer: ````suggestion
};
```
````

My fault - lost this in one of the suggestions

Author: No worries, I was missing some backticks myself. It should be taken care of now.
